66. However, the Court notes that some further recommendations and 
measures were not followed or complied with. It must be stated at this 
juncture that it is not the Court's task to verify whether the domestic courts 
correctly applied domestic criminal law; what is in issue in the present 
proceedings is not individual criminal-law liability, but the State's 
responsibility under the Convention. The Court must grant substantial 
deference to the national courts in the choice of appropriate measures, while 
also maintaining a certain power of review and the power to intervene in 
cases of manifest disproportion between the gravity of the act and the results 
obtained at domestic level (see, mutatis mutandis, Nikolova and Velichkova 
v. Bulgaria, no. 7888/03, § 62, 20 December 2007; Atalay v. Turkey, 
no. 1249/03, § 40, 18 September 2008; and Beganović v. Croatia, 
no. 46423/06, § 78, ECHR 2009-...).
67. In this connection the Court notes that the obligation on the State 
under Article 8 of the Convention in cases involving acts of violence against 
an applicant would usually require the State to adopt adequate positive 
20 A v. CROATIA JUDGMENT
measures in the sphere of criminal-law protection. The Court stresses that 
the Convention is a living instrument which must be interpreted in the light 
of present-day conditions and that the increasingly high standard being 
required in the area of the protection of human rights and fundamental 
liberties correspondingly and inevitably requires greater firmness in 
assessing breaches of the fundamental values of democratic societies (see, 
mutatis mutandis, Selmouni v. France, [GC], no. 25803/94, § 101, ECHR 
1999-V; Mayeka and Mitunga v. Belgium, no. 13178/03, § 48, ECHR 
2006-XI; and Sandra Janković, cited above, § 47). Bringing to justice 
perpetrators of violent acts serves mainly to ensure that such acts do not 
remain ignored by the relevant authorities and to provide effective 
protection against them.
(i) Detention
68. In the criminal proceedings instituted on 1 March 2006 the Zagreb 
Municipal Court, in a judgment of 16 October 2006, found B guilty on two 
counts of making death threats, against the applicant and against a 
policewoman, and sentenced him to eight months' imprisonment. B has not 
yet started to serve that prison term.
69. In one of the sets of minor offences proceedings on charges of 
domestic violence a decision was adopted on 2 October 2006 ordering the 
applicant to pay a fine in the amount of HRK 6,000. He paid only 
HRK 1,000 and the remaining HRK 5,000 was supplemented by a prison 
term, but B never served his prison sentence. The Government explained 
that this was because Z. Prison was full to capacity.
70. Instead he was arrested as late as 4 September 2009 in a separate set 
of criminal proceedings concerning charges of death threats against a judge 
and her daughter, and was placed in pre-trial detention. In these proceedings 
a judgment sentencing B to three years' imprisonment was adopted on 
19 October 2009.
(ii) Psychiatric treatment
71. At the same time an order was made for B to undergo psychiatric 
treatment. While the Court agrees that this measure was desirable, it cannot 
but note that it was not applied in connection with any proceedings 
concerning B's violence against the applicant. Furthermore, it was applied 
several years after the applicant had reported frequent incidents involving 
verbal and physical violence and death threats by B. The Court also notes 
that the Government have provided no information as to whether an 
individual programme for the execution of B's prison term was designed by 
the prison governor as required under section 69 of the Enforcement of 
Prison Sentences Act. An individual programme of this kind in respect of B 
takes on additional importance in view of the fact that his prison term was 
combined with a measure as significant as compulsory psychiatric treatment 
ordered by the domestic courts in relation to the serious death threats he had 
A v. CROATIA JUDGMENT 21
made (see, by way of comparison, Branko Tomašić and Others v. Croatia, 
no. 46598/06, § 56, ECHR 2009-...).
72. In this connection the Court notes that as early as December 2004 a 
psychiatrist who examined B found that he suffered from chronic PTSD, 
with symptoms that included lowered tolerance of frustration, latent 
aggressiveness, a worsening of his condition and impaired social 
functioning, in particular in family life. In another psychiatric report, dated 
January 2008, it was found that B was in need of continuing psychiatric 
control and supervision and that a regular programme of therapy would 
preserve his relatively stable mental condition and hence diminish the 
likelihood of his repeating the criminal offences and, in practical terms, 
remove the risk to his environment.
73. In one set of minor offences proceedings on charges of domestic 
violence, a decision of 2 October 2006 ordered that the applicant should 
undergo psycho-social treatment in order to address his mental health 
problems in connection with his violent behaviour (see paragraph 31 
above). However, owing to the lack of licensed individuals or agencies able 
to execute such a protective measure, it was never enforced (see §§ 31-33 
above).
(iii) Fines
74. The Court notes that the Government have not submitted any 
information showing that the fine of HRK 2,000 which B was ordered to 
pay in the minor offences proceedings on 20 November 2006 has been 
enforced. Further to that, in another set of minor offences proceedings, he 
was ordered to pay a fine in the amount of HRK 7,000 on 19 July 2007. 
However, the national courts allowed these proceedings to become timebarred when they were pending before the appeal court.

FOR THESE REASONS, THE COURT UNANIMOUSLY
1. Declares the complaints submitted under Articles 2, 3, 8 and 13 of the 
Convention admissible and the remainder of the application 
inadmissible;
2. Holds that there has been a violation of Article 8 of the Convention;
3. Holds that there is no need to examine the complaints under Articles 2, 3 
and 13 of the Convention;
4. Holds
(a) that the respondent State is to pay the applicant, within three months 
of the date on which the judgment becomes final in accordance with 
Article 44 § 2 of the Convention, the following amounts, which are to be 
converted into Croatian kuna at the rate applicable on the date of 
settlement:
A v. CROATIA JUDGMENT 29
(i) EUR 9,000 (nine thousand euros), plus any tax that may be 
chargeable, in respect of non-pecuniary damage;
(ii) EUR 4,470 (four thousand four hundred and seventy euros), 
plus any tax that may be chargeable to the applicant, in respect of 
costs and expenses;
(b) that from the expiry of the above-mentioned three months until 
settlement simple interest shall be payable on the above amounts at a 
rate equal to the marginal lending rate of the European Central Bank 
during the default period plus three percentage points;
5. Dismisses the remainder of the applicant's claim for just satisfaction


