
77. The Government maintained that the allegations had not been proved 
(see paragraph 65 above).

FOR THESE REASONS, THE COURT
1. Dismisses by eighteen votes to three the preliminary objection 
concerning the exhaustion of domestic remedies;
2. Dismisses unanimously the preliminary objection concerning abuse of 
process;
3. Holds by fourteen votes to seven that there has been a violation of 
Article 3 of the Convention;
4. Holds by sixteen votes to five that there has been a violation of 
Article 13 of the Convention;
5. Holds by twenty votes to one that it is not necessary to consider the 
applicant’s complaint under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention;
6. Holds unanimously that there has been no violation of Article 25 § 1 of 
the Convention;
7. Holds unanimously that it is not necessary to consider the applicant’s 
complaints under Articles 28 § 1 (a) and 53 of the Convention;
8. Holds by eighteen votes to three
(a) that the respondent State is to pay the applicant, within three months, 
in respect of compensation for non-pecuniary damage, 25,000 (twentyfive thousand) pounds sterling to be converted into Turkish liras at the 
rate applicable on the date of settlement;
(b) that simple interest at an annual rate of 8% shall be payable from the 
expiry of the above-mentioned three months until settlement;
9. Holds by sixteen votes to five
(a) that the respondent State is to pay directly to the applicant’s United 
Kingdom-based representatives, within three months, in respect of costs 
and expenses 34,360 (thirty-four thousand three hundred and sixty) 
pounds sterling together with any VAT that may be chargeable, less 
19,145 (nineteen thousand one hundred and forty-five) French francs to 
be converted into pounds sterling at the rate applicable on the date of 
delivery of the present judgment; and her Turkish representatives 3,000 
(three thousand) pounds sterling to be converted into Turkish liras at the 
rate applicable on the date of settlement;
(b) that simple interest at an annual rate of 8% shall be payable from the 
expiry of the above-mentioned three months until settlement;
10. Dismisses unanimously the remainder of the applicant’s claim for just 
satisfaction.
Done in English and in French, and delivered at a public hearing in the 
Human Rights Building, Strasbourg, on 25 September 1997.