 Application of these principles to the circumstances of the present case
(i) Procedural obligations and victim status
43.  The Court observes that, since the crux of the application is that the 
inactivity and negligence of the law-enforcement authorities was one of the 
main reasons why the domestic abuse was allowed to escalate, culminating 
in C’s murder, and given that the authorities knew or should have known of 
the high level of risk faced by her if they failed to discharge their policing 
duties properly – as she was complaining about a fellow police officer, with 
access to a firearm – and were thus in a position to establish whether he had 
been involved in similar incidents in the past or his propensity to violence, 
the Court considers that their inactivity and negligence went beyond a mere 
error of judgment or carelessness. Consequently, amongst the remedies used 
by the applicants at domestic level, the most pertinent for the purposes of 
Article 35 § 1 of the Convention were the criminal proceedings instituted 
against the police officers and public prosecutors involved (see 
paragraphs 20-25 above and compare Tkhelidze, cited above, § 60).
44.  However, the Court notes with concern that the competent 
investigative authority neither made an attempt to establish responsibility on 
the part of the police officers for their failure to respond properly to the 
multiple incidents of gender-based violence occurring prior to C’s murder nor 
deem it necessary to grant the applicants victim status. No disciplinary 
inquiry into the police’s alleged inaction was even opened, and no steps were 
taken to train the police officers in question on how to respond properly to 
allegations of domestic violence in the future. As regards the part of the 
applicants’ complaint calling into question the inaction of the public 
prosecutors, no response was received whatsoever – the applicants repeatedly 
sought but failed to receive information from the investigative authority on 
this aspect of their criminal complaint. However, in the light of the relevant 
circumstances of the case, in particular the existence of indices pointing to 
possible gender based discrimination as at least partly informing the response 
of law enforcement to the complainant and the complaints and the fact that 
they permitted the alleged perpetrator to participate in the questioning of the A AND B v. GEORGIA JUDGMENT
11complainant and victim of the alleged domestic abuse, the Court considers 
that there was a pressing need to conduct a meaningful investigation into the 
response of law enforcement and their inaction, which might have been 
motivated by gender-based discrimination, in the face of C’s complaints 
(compare Tkhelidze, cited above, § 60). The fact that the alleged perpetrator 
of the violence of the abuse was a member of law enforcement himself, and 
that the threats he had used against the victim and her family referred to this 
fact and what he considered to be his impunity, rendered the need for a proper 
investigation all the more pressing.
45.  Although the above considerations are sufficient for the Court to 
conclude that there has been a breach by the respondent State of its procedural 
obligations under Article 2 read in conjunction with Article 14 of the 
Convention (ibid., §§ 58-60), it notes in addition the insufficiency of the 
redress offered by the two other sets of domestic proceedings – the criminal 
prosecution of the perpetrator and civil proceedings brought by the applicants 
against the law-enforcement authorities. With respect to the former, the Court 
notes that D’s trial and conviction did not involve any examination of the 
possible role of gender-based discrimination in the commission of the crime 
(see paragraph 19 above). As regards the latter, whilst it was undoubtedly 
positive that the domestic courts acknowledged the law-enforcement 
authorities’ failure to take measures aimed at putting an end to the gender-
based discrimination and protect C’s life, the Court notes that they did not 
expand their scrutiny to the question of whether the official tolerance of 
incidents of domestic violence might have been conditioned by the same 
gender bias. Nor have the courts addressed the question of whether there had 
been indications of the relevant law-enforcement officers’ acquiescence or 
connivance in the gender-motivated abuses perpetrated by their colleague, D. 
These gaps in the response of the domestic courts do not sit well with the 
respondent State’s heightened duty to tackle prejudice-motivated crimes.
46.  The Court thus concludes that, in the particular circumstances of the 
present case and having regard to the nature and quantum of the pecuniary 
award, the applicants have retained their victim status within the meaning of 
Article 34 (see paragraph 35 above) and that there has been a violation of the 
procedural limb of Article 2 read in conjunction with Article 14 of the 
Convention.
(ii) Substantive positive obligations
47.  Like the leading case of Tkhelidze, the circumstances of the present 
application confirm that there was clearly a lasting situation of domestic 
violence, which means that there could be no doubt about the immediacy of 
the danger to the victim, and that the police knew or certainly ought to have 
known of the nature of that situation. Although they were put on alert about 
the seriousness of the risks, the police failed to display the requisite special 
diligence and committed major failings in their work such as inaccurate, A AND B v. GEORGIA JUDGMENT
12incomplete or even misleading evidence gathering and not attempting to 
conduct a proper analysis of what the potential trigger factors for the violence 
could be (see paragraphs 10 and 12 above and compare with Tkhelidze, cited 
above, § 53). In this connection, the Court reiterates that shortcomings in the 
gathering of evidence in response to a reported incident of domestic violence 
can result in an underestimation of the level of violence actually committed, 
can have deleterious effects on the prospects of opening a criminal 
investigation and even discourage victims of domestic abuse, who are often 
already under pressure from society, from reporting an abusive family 
member to the authorities in the future (ibid., § 54).
48.  The Court also observes that whilst the domestic legislative 
framework provided for various temporary restrictive measures in respect of 
alleged abusers (compare Tkhelidze, cited above, 55), the relevant domestic 
authorities did not resort to them at all. It does not appear from the various 
reports and records drawn up by the police officers that the victim was ever 
advised by the police of her procedural rights and of the various legislative 
and administrative measures of protection available to her. The Court further 
considers that the inactivity of the domestic law-enforcement authorities 
appears to be even more concerning when assessed against the fact that the 
abuser was himself a police officer. What is more, whilst the law-enforcement 
authorities were perfectly aware that he was using various attributes of his 
official position to commit abuse against C (intimidating her with his service 
pistol on many occasions, repeatedly claiming impunity for his acts on 
account of his belonging to the law-enforcement machinery, threatening to 
bring false charges against C’s father and brother if the victim reported the 
abuse to the police, and so on), not only did the police not put an end to that 
demonstration of ultimate impunity and arbitrariness (see Ushakov 
and Ushakova v. Ukraine, no. 10705/12, § 83, 18 June 2015), they, on the 
contrary, allowed the alleged abuser to participate in the questioning of his 
victim and soon after promoted the abuser to a higher police rank (see 
paragraphs 14 and 15 above). The Court finds this aspect of the case to be 
particularly troubling because it expects Member States to be all the more 
stringent when investigating and, where appropriate, punishing their own 
law-enforcement officers for the commission of serious crimes, including 
domestic violence and violence against women in general, than they are with 
ordinary offenders, because what is at stake is not only the issue of the 
individual criminal-law liability of the perpetrators but also the State’s duty 
to combat any sense of impunity felt by the offenders by virtue of their very 
office, and maintain public confidence in and respect for the law-enforcement 
system (see, mutatis mutandis, Vazagashvili and Shanava v. Georgia, 
no. 50375/07, § 92, 18 July 2019, and Makuchyan and Minasyan 
v. Azerbaijan and Hungary, no. 17247/13, § 157, 26 May 2020).
49.  The Court thus concludes that the present case can be seen as yet 
another vivid example of how general and discriminatory passivity of the A AND B v. GEORGIA JUDGMENT
13law-enforcement authorities in the face of allegations of domestic violence 
can create a climate conducive to a further proliferation of violence 
committed against victims merely because they are women. In disregard of 
the panoply of various protective measures that were directly available, the 
authorities did not prevent gender-based violence against the applicants’ 
next-of-kin, which culminated in her death, and they compounded this failure 
with an attitude of passivity, even accommodation, as regards the alleged 
perpetrator, later convicted of the victim’s murder. The respondent State has 
thus breached its substantive positive obligations under Article 2 of the 
Convention read in in conjunction with Article 14.



FOR THESE REASONS, THE COURT, UNANIMOUSLY,
1.Joins to the merits the question relating to the applicants’ victim status;
2.Declares the application admissible;
3.Holds that the applicants may claim to be victims for the purposes of 
Article 34 and that there has been a violation of Article 2 under its 
substantive positive and procedural limbs taken in conjunction with 
Article 14 of the Convention;
4.Holds
(a) that the respondent State is to pay the applicants jointly, within three 
months from the date on which the judgment becomes final in 
accordance with Article 44 § 2 of the Convention, EUR 35,000 
(thirty-five thousand euros), plus any tax that may be chargeable, in 
respect of non‑pecuniary damage, to be converted into the currency of 
the respondent State at the rate applicable at the date of settlement; 
and
(b) that from the expiry of the above-mentioned three months until 
settlement simple interest shall be payable on the above amount at a 
rate equal to the marginal lending rate of the European Central Bank 
during the default period plus three percentage points;
5.Dismisses the remainder of the applicants’ claim for just satisfaction.
Done in English, and notified in writing on 10 February 2022, pursuant to 
Rule 77 §§ 2 and 3 of the Rules of Court.
