Question,Answer
What is the legal outcome of Case?,"Abuse1: The Court dismissed the preliminary objection concerning the exhaustion of domestic remedies by eighteen votes to three. The Court dismissed unanimously the preliminary objection concerning abuse of process. The Court held by fourteen votes to seven that there had been a violation of Article 3 of the Convention. The Court held by sixteen votes to five that there had been a violation of Article 13 of the Convention. The Court held by twenty votes to one that it was not necessary to consider the applicant’s complaint under Article 6 § 1 of the Convention. The Court held unanimously that there had been no violation of Article 25 § 1 of the Convention. The Court held unanimously that it was not necessary to consider the applicant’s complaints under Articles 28 § 1 (a) and 53 of the Convention. The Court held by eighteen votes to three that the respondent State is to pay the applicant, within three months, in respect of compensation for non-pecuniary damage, 25,000 pounds sterling to be converted into Turkish liras at the rate applicable on the date of settlement. Simple interest at an annual rate of 8% shall be payable from the expiry of the above-mentioned three months until settlement. The Court dismissed unanimously the remainder of the applicant’s claim for just satisfaction. Abuse2: The Court held by sixteen votes to five that the respondent State is to pay directly to the applicant’s United Kingdom-based representatives, within three months, in respect of costs and expenses 34,360 pounds sterling together with any VAT that may be chargeable, less 19,145 French francs to be converted into pounds sterling at the rate applicable on the date of delivery of the present judgment; and her Turkish representatives 3,000 pounds sterling to be converted into Turkish liras at the rate applicable on the date of settlement."
Which legal case is associated with Violation?,"Abuse1 is associated with violations of Article 3 and Article 13 of the Convention."
What is the legal status?,
How much in legal damages and costs were awarded?,"Abuse1: 25,000 pounds sterling for non-pecuniary damage, with an annual interest rate of 8% payable after three months until settlement. Abuse2: 34,360 pounds sterling for costs and expenses, with additional specifications for VAT and currency conversions."
Which court judged the Case?,
What is the reason stated for the judgment?,
What is the context of Abuse?,"For both Abuse1 and Abuse2, the context is ""The Human Rights Building""."
What are the consequences of Abuse?,"Abuse1: Multiple judgments on various articles of the Convention, compensation of 25,000 pounds sterling with interest, and dismissal of other claims. Abuse2: Payment of 34,360 pounds sterling for costs and expenses, with currency conversion details and additional amounts to Turkish representatives."
What is the duration and frequency of Abuse?,"For both Abuse1 and Abuse2: Duration: P1D (1 day) Frequency: 1"
What is the severity level of Abuse?,"For both Abuse1 and Abuse2, the severity level is 8."
Which legal article are violated?,"For Abuse1: Article 3 and Article 13 of the Convention."
What abuse is related to Judgment?,"For both Abuse1 and Abuse2, the abuses are related to the judgments as described in their respective consequences."
What are the damages related to Judgment?,"For Abuse1: 25,000 pounds sterling for non-pecuniary damage, with 8% interest. For Abuse2: 34,360 pounds sterling for costs and expenses, with additional specifications for VAT and currency conversions."
